---
date: "2021-09-05"
title: My Experience using Arch as a Productivity OS
---

When I heard the Windows 11 launch announcement I was livid. Microsoft, who told literally everyone that Windows 10 would be the last version of Windows, went back on their word and said "Yeah we're doing Windows 11 now". I know Billy G's company isn't known for being the most honest, but come on, there is nothing wrong with Windows 10, and I would go as far as to say its my favorite version of Windows (well, tied with Windows 7). I am experienced with Linux, but I never used Linux as a daily driver OS on my Desktop as its primary purpose was to be a gaming system. My old laptop was dual-booted with [Kubuntu](https://kubuntu.org/) as I used Linux for school, since it played nicer with my programs I used for school, but still had Windows due to one class where the programs would _only run on Windows_.

This past February I got a developer job, and since nearly all the programs I write run server-side, I needed to develop them in Docker or Linux. Originally I was using WSL and Docker for Windows when developing on my desktop, which have their own set of problems (mainly that they are not resource efficient). I was tired of seeing that while developing lightweight web applications, my RAM use was well over 20GB, and so many other programs were running in the background that didn't need to be there. Why did "AntiMalware service executable" take up half my CPU when I was just editing some Javascript in VSCode?

When I bought my new laptop in March, a Dell XPS 13 9310 with an i7-1185G7 and 16GB of RAM, I originally left Windows 10 on it. I thought the experience was actually quite nice (other than the usual Dell bloat) and Windows Hello Facial Recognition plus Fingerprint reader were nice novelties. However, I actually bought the laptop with the intention of putting Ubuntu on it, as Dell has the best Linux support of all the big OEMs. Dell actually sells a "[Developer Edition](https://www.dell.com/en-us/work/shop/dell-laptops-and-notebooks/xps-13-developer-edition/spd/xps-13-9310-laptop/ctox139w10p2c3000u)" with Ubuntu and additional RAM options. I opted to get the model on the consumer site since they had a promotion going on, and I wanted Kubuntu anyways so I was going to wipe the OS either way.

I took Microsoft's Windows 11 announcement as a opportunity to try out Linux as a full-time productivity OS on my Desktop, as well as my motivation to switch my laptop to Linux as originally intended. I say _productivity_ specifically because I still need Windows to play my games, as Proton doesn't support the AntiCheat in a few of the games I play, and doesn't have support for my Oculus Quest 2 (I sold my soul to Facebook for cheap VR).
Valve also recently announced the [SteamDeck](https://www.steamdeck.com/), a Linux handheld computer designed to be a gaming PC. With this announcement, they also said they want all games on Steam to be compatible with Linux by the time the SteamDeck launches, which is December 2021, 3 months away, and a little ambitious.
I think a more realistic chance is having _most_ games work by the end of the year and have all games working sometime next year, which I will still take. They also announced with the SteamDeck that the official OS, SteamOS, would be based on Arch Linux with Plasma. I weighed all my options, but I really wanted to give Arch Linux a shot, since I know a few people who daily the OS as say they love it, and you know, getting prepared for the SteamDeck (I reserved the mid-tier SteamDeck). I could also still have my familiar desktop setup of Plasma and Latte Dock, since they're officially and very well by Arch.

I would consider myself and intermediate Linux user. In 2019, I was a [Yocto Linux](https://www.yoctoproject.org/) developer for 9 months when I worked an internship for a local company, and I was the only one who really understood the Linux system for a while (I made my own Yocto build in my free time [here](https://github.com/chand1012/CustomLinux)). I've been using Linux since 2013, when I dual booted my laptop because I wanted to try something new (Ubuntu 12.04 LTS was great). I run Linux servers all the time, on systems ranging from my Raspberry Pi 4 acting as my ARM64 program test machine, VPS machines I rent from Linode that run some of my personal projects, to my local NAS which is running UnRAID (based on Slackware) with many Docker containers and Debian server VMs running on it. As previously stated, I heavily used Kubuntu on my old laptop, which is also why I wanted my Arch installs to be running Plasma DE.

I previously documented many of my Arch Linux woes [here](/Arch-Beginners/), so I'll save you most of the trouble. In summary, the installs went smooth as they could for it being maybe my second and third times installing Arch on my Desktop and Laptop. I documented some things in the linked article that definitely would have made the install smoother had they been on the official install guide, but I still got through it with what Linux knowledge I have.

<!-- Write about using arch as a daily here, and about how its quite minimalist and nice to use as well as easier to maintain than ubuntu -->
